Technical analysis has been around for as long as there have been organized
markets in the form of exchanges. But the trading community didn’t accept
technical analysis as a viable tool for making money until the late 1970s or
early 1980s. Here’s what the technical analyst knew that it took the
mainstream market community generations to catch on to.
A finite number of traders participate in the markets on any given day,
week, or month. Many of these traders do the same kinds of things over and
over in their attempt to make money. In other words, individuals develop
behavior patterns, and a group of individuals, interacting with one another
on a consistent basis, form collective behavior patterns. These behavior
patterns are observable and quantifiable, and they repeat themselves with
statistical reliability.
Technical analysis is a method that organizes this collective behavior into
identifiable patterns that can give a clear indication of when there is a
greater probability of one thing happening over another. In a sense,
technical analysis allows you to get into the mind of the market to anticipate
what’s likely to happen next, based on the kind of patterns the market
generated at some previous moment.
As a method for projecting future price movement, technical analysis has
turned out to be far superior to a purely fundamental approach. It keeps the
trader focused on what the market is doing now in relation to what it has
done in the past, instead of focusing on what the market should be doing
based solely on what is logical and reasonable as determined by a
mathematical model. On the other hand, fundamental analysis creates what
I call a “reality gap” between “what should be” and “what is.” The reality
gap makes it extremely difficult to make anything but very long-term
predictions that can be difficult to exploit, even if they are correct.
In contrast, technical analysis not only closes this reality gap, but also
makes available to the trader a virtually unlimited number of possibilities to
take advantage of. The technical approach opens up many more possibilities
because it identifies how the same repeatable behavior patterns occur in
every time frame—moment-to-moment, daily, weekly, yearly, and every
time span in between. In other words, technical analysis turns the market
into an endless stream of opportunities to enrich oneself.
