Who remembers when fundamental analysis was considered the only real or
proper way to make trading decisions? When I started trading in 1978,
technical analysis was used by only a handful of traders, who were
considered by the rest of the market community to be, at the very least,
crazy. As difficult as it is to believe now, it wasn’t very long ago when Wall
Street and most of the major funds and financial institutions thought that
technical analysis was some form of mystical hocus-pocus.
Now, of course, just the opposite is true. Almost all experienced traders
use some form of technical analysis to help them formulate their trading
strategies. Except for some small, isolated pockets in the academic
community, the “purely” fundamental analyst is virtually extinct. What
caused this dramatic shift in perspective?
I’m sure it’s no surprise to anyone that the answer to this question is very
simple: Money! The problem with making trading decisions from a strictly
fundamental perspective is the inherent difficulty of making money
consistently using this approach.
For those of you who may not be familiar with fundamental analysis, let
me explain. Fundamental analysis attempts to take into consideration all the
variables that could affect the relative balance or imbalance between the
supply of and the possible demand for any particular stock, commodity, or
financial instrument. Using primarily mathematical models that weigh the
significance of a variety of factors (interest rates, balance sheets, weather
patterns, and numerous others), the analyst projects what the price should
be at some point in the future.
The problem with these models is that they rarely, if ever, factor in other
traders as variables. People, expressing their beliefs and expectations about
the future, make prices move—not models. The fact that a model makes a
logical and reasonable projection based on all the relevant variables is not
of much value if the traders who are responsible for most of the trading
volume are not aware of the model or don’t believe in it.
As a matter of fact, many traders, especially those on the floors of the
futures exchanges who have the ability to move prices very dramatically in
one direction or the other, usually don’t have the slightest concept of the
fundamental supply and demand factors that are supposed to affect prices.
Furthermore, at any given moment, much of their trading activity is
prompted by a response to emotional factors that are completely outside the
parameters of the fundamental model. In other words, the people who trade
(and consequently move prices) don’t always act in a rational manner.
Ultimately, the fundamental analyst could find that a prediction about
where prices should be at some point in the future is correct. But in the
meantime, price movement could be so volatile that it would be very
difficult, if not impossible, to stay in a trade in order to realize the objective.
